I'm Stephanie Cruz, ymhlithwyr ymgyrchol ym Mlyncs. Mae'n 14 August 2019.
Ac rwy'n ymwneud ym Mhob ym Mhob, yn Rhaedder, yn ymwneud â Paul Carter.
Paul, mae'n bwysig iawn, gyda'r hyn yn ddaeth amser.
Can you give me a brief outline of the different stages it's been through?
Well, I can. It's not really brief, though, because it's been such a chequered history and it's changed its use so often.
Even the history that we have, it's a little bit blurry right back at the start, but we're now convinced that it dates back to 1803
and is a sister building to the mill over the stream from us, the Derelict Mill.
The building as it was built had a culvert of water which was taken out of the Y.
It ran round the back of the building, through the middle of the building, and drove a water wheel right in the centre of the building.
This one here. Right in this building.
So that was what was happening and we think it was driving machinery from one end of the building to the other, which is quite something.
It's a long building, about 30 metres long.
And the machinery was used for? Do we know that?
I'm not entirely sure. It's all got lost in the history because after about 35 years in use, we believe, as Woollen Mill, that's where it's a bit blurred.
One history document says Woollen Mill, the other one doesn't have any documentation until 1837,
but it definitely was the Castle Leatherworks in 1837.
And what sort of work would they be doing here? Would they be doing something like scraping the hides?
They were taking the leather from the three tanneries in town and converting it, as you say, scraping the hides.
There's a lot of aprons being made, a lot of shammy leathers.
I have seen some documentation and it might be from the one that's been redone in Raglan,
where there were shoes and things being made in Raerdydd and I suspect they were being made here as well.
So it was a big building, three storeys high, again going 30 metres down the length of the building.
And what had happened was, from what we can gather, the woollen industry moved out of Raerdydd,
went across to Newtown around 1837, which ties in with it becoming a leatherworks.
And then it stayed as a leatherworks until the leather industry started to have a few hiccups, which was around 1900.
Do we know who owned the building in 1837?
No, no. It might be on record, but I'm not sure who owned it.
But around that 1900 time, I think it's 1905, that was when the Edward Price Morgan comes in.
And he bought the building as a three storey building. He had military links.
And I think I'm right in saying he was using it as a military base already, the ground floor.
And then there was a massive fire which took out the far end of the building.
I suspect the building was falling down at that time anyway.
It was right down in the floodplain, half a storey below where we're sitting now, which is a long way down,
about eight foot down, right down with the flood levels of the water.
It was three storeys high, so it was twice the height of what we have today.
And knowing the state of the building when we took it on, I think it was probably falling down and they didn't know what to do with it.
So I think the fire, at least it focused their opinion on what to do next.
It took out everything at the end, which is now a hall.
There was nothing left. You could see straight out the far side of the building from one side to the other.
The walls on the one side were pretty much gone already as well.
And it was rebuilt then as a drill hall.
Right.
And that's 1911. It was already being used as a drill hall and the fire was around that time as well.
So it was a very quick conversion they did.
They took the whole of the top floor off.
And I know for a fact that most of it went down underneath our building because I've dug up quite a bit of it.
The stones were original stones, as in the rest of the stone building.
And within two years of being opened as a drill hall, they opened it as a cinema.
And there's remnants of the screen still here and visible.
And they started showing films and very quickly after that, I've just shown Stephanie a photograph of a hung cinema screen.
They cut down the screen they put up and hung a screen and started putting on music events.
So there were three names at exactly the same time then.
There was the drill hall, the castle cinema and the castle ballroom.
So they had dances as well?
There were dances and through both world wars they were used for dances.
That's wonderful. And then what?
Well, as I say, there's lots of stories attached to the wartime dances.
Apparently the Rehada folk used to love coming to some of the American nights.
And unbelievably, it sounds so crazy in these days, there were black nights and white nights in the hall.
And the Rehada people loved the black nights because the music was apparently amazing.
And a white general decided he was going to put an end to these nights and came in stamped his foot on the stage.
The band heard the beat, started playing with the beat of his feet and the whole place went into complete uproar.
Everybody dancing, leaping around and the general had to leave.
You can imagine it, can't you?
Yeah, just the whole building does seem to love music.
As soon as you start playing music in there, you can feel it sort of beating along with it.
I have got a recording which was an EP made by one of the local bands.
They recorded some music. They called themselves the Dam Busters.
Referring back to the fact that the film was filmed up here and that was where the actual Dam Buster thing was originally practiced.
They practiced the Barnes Walliser. So it was a great name for them to have.
And they released an EP, which there are still a few copies rattling around and we have a copy of a copy.
A recording there?
Yeah, I hope so. I have warned Stephanie that playing isn't the easiest.
Brilliant, that's really good. And there are three tracks on that.
There are six tracks on that EP. Plenty of selection.
Three of that band are still alive, still living in Rhaedau.
We lost Little Don unfortunately a couple of years back.
He played the harmonica.
Piano accordion.
Piano accordion. You can tell I'm a musician as well. I'm glad you're listening.
Piano accordion that was almost as big as he was.
And there's Glenda joining in with the conversation.
And he played the left hand.
Right.
But we tried to get him to play in his last year of his life and he would have loved to.
But he said he just could not handle the piano accordion. It was too big.
He just couldn't handle it anymore.
And the other three band members?
There's John Humphreys. He was the drummer.
David Evans was the double bass.
And I always forget Mike's second name. What's Mike's second name, Glen?
Bennett.
Mike Bennett who used to work at the water treatment plant.
Yes, correct. He was vocals and guitar.
And there were two others who I never got to meet at all.
Say Little Don, I can't remember his second name either.
There was plenty of people in Rhaedau who will know them all.
Yes, brilliant.
And so after, I guess it's almost heyday during the wars, what happened?
It carried on as a music venue.
Obviously they're slightly different because there were so many people lost during the war, particularly the men folk.
And it stayed with us until television started to kick in and people started to stay in their homes and not go out.
And there was a brief period when it became an engineering works.
Orbital Gears, who are still in town, started to work here.
And unfortunately for them, the culvert was still under the building and it flooded.
And their machinery was all at ground floor level and they had to lift the machinery out to get it away.
And they moved up to the other end of town away from the floodplain.
And at that point it became a supermarket.
And J&B supermarket, I think, was the first.
It looks like the Morgan family were involved in running the supermarket because there's lots of pieces of paper attached to, I think it's JP Morgan.
But it's most commonly known as the Old Mace supermarket because that was what the supermarket was prior to us taking it on.
But I did warn you that it's not a short history unless it's had lots of use.
And the number of people who have memories of either working in here or coming to events is quite incredible.
They keep on coming down to see us at the hall and talking to us.
We've obviously stirred a lot of memories.
Yes, it's lovely. And a little bit about yourself. Why did you take it on? Why were you brought in? What do you want to do with it?
Because I'm a bit silly really.
My mother-in-law still lives in Raerdyd. She's aged 97 now.
And we were visiting Raerdyd every year, every school holiday.
We knew how nice a time we had holidaying here. And that was 30 years with our children growing up.
The building was getting into a terrible state. It had lain empty for eight years.
And there wasn't a window left intact on the building. It was quite clear that the roof had gone from one end to the other.
And sadly the stonework was starting to crack on the bottom end of the hall, so the riverside end.
And it's a building I've always been quite fond of, quite liked. It was an interesting building from the outside.
So I wondered what was going on. Why was it lying empty? It went to auction and didn't sell.
And I came up with a crazy plan for a music venue and cafe.
Which eventually I talked my family into looking at.
Right. And when was this?
That's going back to 2012 was when we first started looking at it.
We put together what can only be described as a crazy business plan.
And started negotiating with a view to buying.
And at one point it looked like it was sold, but it came back to us.
And it seems like the hall wanted to be saved and wanted to be saved as a music venue.
That's how it's felt ever since. Every time we've wondered what on earth are we going to do next, something's happened.
And it's carried on. And we're very proud to say we're now an award-winning cafe.
And a music venue which bands just love. It's as simple as that.
We're getting some of the best bands in Britain playing here.
It certainly has a lovely atmosphere when you come in.
And very welcoming with the outdoor space that you've got there.
One of my colleagues at Ellen Lynx has actually played here as well. She says it's a lovely venue.
So yeah, it is a real asset to me.
The bands are coming in, we're getting top musicians coming in and they're obviously talking to one another.
And the first thing they're doing is clapping their hands, clicking their fingers and just going, wow.
So there is something a bit special and we're not quite sure what it is.
We're terrified of doing too much work in there because we know how easy it is to spoil an acoustic.
So we're treading caegely on the inside of the hall.
We're trying to get away with it as it is for as long as possible and get on with the rest of the building work.
So you've still got plenty to do then?
Yes, we're in the process of doing the changing rooms and the backstage areas now.
So for the bands it's going to be a much nicer area for them to prepare, get ready to go so they can get straight on stage.
They'll have a toilet backstage so if anybody gets desperate to go to the loo,
they can just go and come back without interfering too much with performance.
And what we have done is reversed the direction from when Mike Bennett and Don and all the team
were singing in here. We actually have our stage at what I call the top end of the hall
and our bar is where the stage was when they were playing in it.
So we've turned it around, but it seems like the atmosphere is exactly the same.
It's still...
Brilliant.
And yeah, we're hoping to show films. So at one time maybe we'll become the Castle Cinema, the Castle Ballroom.
I don't see us becoming a drill hall again, but that's possible as well.
But where did you get the name from, The Lost Ark? What's the story behind that?
We have lots of lost arks, but we'd come up with the name Lost Ark before any of those arks actually got uncovered.
Again, it seems like serendipity that we actually found arks.
But we've called it Art Roots Cafe.
And the very sad thing is two people suggested The Lost Ark in the same week.
A very bright student who my wife and I used to teach and my son's mother-in-law both suggested it within two days of one another.
Because everybody's heard of Raiders of the Lost Ark and we're the Lost Ark of Raider.
And it was a simple, very unfunny little thing, but it amused us all.
And to be quite fair, we'd still be discussing the name of the building if we hadn't decided let's go for it.
It makes people smile, it's memorable and it's stuck.
And now people just say they're going down to the Ark. So that's great.
It's become a Raider name.
That's right, already.
Well done to you and to the family and good luck with the future.
Thank you very much, Stephanie. Thank you.